Reconsider Node to Participant mapping (#250)
ros2/design: articles/151_node_to_participant_mapping.md

---
layout: default
title: Node to Participant mapping
permalink: articles/node_to_participant_mapping.html

> abstract: This article analyzes the performance implications of enforcings a one-to-one mapping between ROS nodes and DDS participants, and proposes alternative approaches.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit:
```suggestion
abstract: This article analyzes the performance implications of enforcing a one-to-one mapping between ROS nodes and DDS participants, and proposes alternative implementation approaches.
```

author: '[Ivan Paunovic](https://github.com/ivanpauno)'
published: true
categories: Middleware
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

Original Author: {{ page.author }}

## Background

### `Node`

In ROS, a `Node` is an entity used to group other entities.
For example: `Publishers`, `Subscriptions`, `Services`, `Clients`.
`Nodes` ease organization and code reuse, as they can be composed in different ways.

### `Domain Participant`

A `Domain Participant` is a type of DDS entity.
`Participants` also group other entities, like `Publishers`, `Subscribers`, `Data Writters`, `Data Readers`, etc.
Creating more `Participants` adds overhead to an application:

- Each `Participant` participates in discovery.

>   Creating more than one `Participant` increases cpu usage and network IO load.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
  Creating more than one `Participant` usually increases CPU usage and network IO load.
```

> - Each `Participant` keeps track of other `Domain Participants` and DDS entities.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
- Each `Participant` keeps track of other `Participants` and DDS entities.
```

>   Using more than one will duplicate that data within a single process.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
  Using more than one within a single process will result in data duplication.
```

- Each `Participant` may create multiple threads for event handling, discovery, etc.

>   The number of threads created per participant depend on the DDS vendor (e.g.: [connext](https://community.rti.com/best-practices/create-few-domainparticipants-possible)).

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
  The number of threads created per `Participant` depends on the DDS vendor (e.g.: [RTI Connext](https://community.rti.com/best-practices/create-few-domainparticipants-possible)).
```

For those reasons, `Participants` are a heavyweight entity.

Note: This might actually depend on the DDS implementation, some of them share these resources between `Participants` (e.g. OpenSplice).

> Many `DDS` vendors don't do this (e.g.: `rti Connext` and `Fast-RTPS`), and they actually recommend creating just one `Participant` per process.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit:
```suggestion
Many `DDS` vendors, however, do not perform this kind of optimizations (e.g.: `RTI Connext` and `Fast-RTPS`), and actually recommend creating just one `Participant` per process.
```

### `Context`

> In ROS, a `Context` is the no-global state of an init-shutdown cycle.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit:
```suggestion
In ROS, a `Context` is the non-global state of an init-shutdown cycle.
```

It also encapsulates shared state between nodes and other entities.
In most applications, there is only one `ROS Context` in a process.

> ## Current status

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: it'd be good to state what does `current` mean in this context (i.e. pre-Foxy)

There is a one-to-one mapping between `Nodes` and `DDS Participants`.
This simplified the original implementation, as `DDS Participants` provide many features equivalent to the ones of a `ROS Node`.

> The drawback of this approach is the overhead originated by creating many participants.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit:
```suggestion
The drawback of this approach is the overhead that comes with many participants.
```

Furthermore, the maximum number of `Domain participants` is rather small.

> For example, [RTI connext](https://community.rti.com/kb/what-maximum-number-participants-domain) is limited to 120 participants per domain.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit:
```suggestion
For example, in [RTI Connext](https://community.rti.com/kb/what-maximum-number-participants-domain) it is limited to 120 participants per domain.
```

## Proposed approach

The goal of this proposal is to improve overall performance by avoiding the creation of one `Domain Participant` per `Node`.
API changes will be avoided, if possible.

### Mapping of `DDS Participant` to a `ROS` entity

There are two alternatives, besides the current `Node` to `Participant` mapping:

> - Using one participant per process.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno hmm I think it'd be nice to list `Using one participant per node`  and eliminate the `current` adjective above.

- Using one participant per context.

> The second approach allows more flexibility, and it will allow creating more than one `Participant` for applications that need it --e.g. domain bridge applications--.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
The second approach allows more flexibility, and it will allow creating more than one `Participant` for applications that need it e.g. domain bridge applications.
```

Thus, a one to one `Participant` to `Context` mapping was chosen.

> In the case where multiple nodes are running in a single process, we have different options for grouping them by - ranging from a separate context for each node, over grouping a few nodes in the same context, to using a single context for all nodes.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit:
```suggestion
When multiple nodes are running in a single process, there are different options for context (re)use -- ranging from a separate context for each node, over grouping a few nodes in the same context, to using a single context for all nodes.
```

For most applications, only one `Context` is created.

### Discovery information

> When not using a one to one `Node`/`Participant` mapping, extra discovery information is needed to be able to match other entities to a `Node` --e.g. publishers, subscriptions, etc--.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
if a one to one `Node`-to-`Participant` mapping is not used, extra discovery information is needed to be able to match other entities to a `Node` e.g. publishers, subscriptions, etc.
```

> Several approaches can be used to share this information, the proposed approach uses a topic for it.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit:
```suggestion
Several approaches can be used to share this information. The proposed approach uses a topic for it.
```

Each `Participant` publishes a message with all the information needed to match an entity to a `Node`.

> The message definition is the following:

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
The message structure is the following:
```
to not confuse it with IDL definitions.

* ParticipantInfo
  * gid
  * NodeInfo
    * node namespace
    * node name
    * reader gid
    * writed gid

> When one entity is updated --e.g.: A `Publisher` is created or destroyed--, a new message is sent.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit:
```suggestion
When one entity is updated (e.g.: a `Publisher` is created or destroyed), a new message is sent.
```

> Identification of `Clients` and `Services` happens according to the ros conventions for their topic names (see [	

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit:
```suggestion
Identification of `Clients` and `Services` happens according to the ROS conventions for their topic names (see [	
```

Topic and Service name mapping to DDS](140_topic_and_service_name_mapping.md)).

This topic is considered an implementation detail, and not all `rmw` implementations have to use it.

> Thus, all the necessary logic has to be in the rmw implementation itself or in a downstream package.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno I find this sentence awkward. Don't we conclude the exact opposite in the next two sentences?

That was possible because each node was mapped to one `Participant`.
The new approach allows to specify different security artifacts for each process.
For more details, see [ROS 2 Security Enclaves](ros2_security_enclaves.md).

#### Ignore local publications option

There's an `ignore_local_publications` option that can be set when [creating a subscription](https://github.com/ros2/rmw/blob/2250b3eee645d90f9e9d6c96d71ce3aada9944f3/rmw/include/rmw/rmw.h#L517).
That option avoids receiving messages from `Publishers` within the same `Node`.
This wasn't implemented in all the rmw implementations (e.g.: [FastRTPS](https://github.com/ros2/rmw_fastrtps/blob/099f9eed9a0f581447405fbd877c6d3b15f1f26e/rmw_fastrtps_cpp/src/rmw_subscription.cpp#L118)).

After this change, implementing this feature will be less direct.
Some extra logic needs to be added in order to identify from which `Node` a `Publisher` was created.

## Alternative implementations

### Using keyed topics

Keyed topics could be used, with the participant gid as the key.
That would allow the reader side of the topic to use a keep last, depth 1 history.

### Using participant/writer/reader user data

> Instead of using a custom topic to share the extra ROS specific discovery information, a combination of participant/reader/writer user data could be used.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
Instead of using a custom topic to share the extra ROS specific discovery information, a combination of participant/reader/writer user data could be used:
```
and consider removing the following `e.g.:`.

e.g.:

- Participant user data: list of nodes created by the participant (updated when node created destroyed).
- Reader user data: node name/namespace.
- Writer user data: node name/namespace.

That information would be enough to satisfy ros2 required graph API.

> This mechanism will also avoid to have a topic where all nodes need to have write and read access.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
This mechanism would also preclude having a topic that has to be read and written by all nodes.
```

> This alternative wasn't implemented because of lack of support in some of the currently supported DDS vendors.

Author: I remember when I started the implementation of this, some of the user data qos weren't implemented in FastRtps.

It seems that now they are, @richiware can you clarify? If it's supported now, I want to make that clear in the document.

Reviewer 2: Sorry for the delay. I missed the mention.
Yes, FastDDS supports Participant/Reader/Writer UserData QoS.

---
layout: default
title: Node to Participant mapping
permalink: articles/Node_to_Participant_mapping.html
abstract: This article analyzes the performance implications of enforcing a one-to-one mapping between ROS Nodes and DDS Participants, and proposes alternative implementation approaches.
author: '[Ivan Paunovic](https://github.com/ivanpauno)'
published: true
categories: Middleware
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

Original Author: {{ page.author }}

## Background

### Node

In ROS, a Node is an entity used to group other entities.
For example: Publishers, Subscriptions, Servers, Clients.
Nodes ease organization and code reuse, as they can be composed in different ways.

### Domain Participant

A Participant is a type of DDS entity.
Participant also group other entities, like Publishers, Subscribers, Data Writters, Data Readers, etc.
Creating more Participants adds overhead to an application:

- Each Participant participates in discovery.
  Creating more than one Participant usually increases CPU usage and network IO load.
- Each Participant keeps track of other DDS entities.

>   Using more than one within a single process will result in data duplication.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: I think it's fair to say it `may result` 
```suggestion
  Using more than one within a single process may result in data duplication.
```

- Each Participant may create multiple threads for event handling, discovery, etc.

>   The number of threads created per Participant depend on the DDS vendor (e.g.: [RTI Connext](https://community.rti.com/best-practices/create-few-domainParticipants-possible)).

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
  The number of threads created per Participant depends on the DDS vendor (e.g.: [RTI Connext](https://community.rti.com/best-practices/create-few-domainParticipants-possible)).
```

For those reasons, a Participant is a heavyweight entity.

> Note: This might actually depend on the DDS implementation, some of them share these resources between Participants (e.g. OpenSplice).

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
Note: This might actually depend on the DDS vendor, some of them share these resources between Participants (e.g. `OpenSplice`).
```

### Context

In ROS, a Context is the non-global state of an init-shutdown cycle.
It also encapsulates shared state between Nodes and other entities.
In most applications, there is only one ROS Context in a process.

## Behavior pre-Foxy

There is a one-to-one mapping between Nodes and DDS Participants.
This simplified the original implementation, as DDS Participants provide many features equivalent to the ones of ROS Nodes.
The drawback of this approach is the overhead that comes with creating many Participants.
Furthermore, the maximum number of Domain Participants is rather small.
For example, in [RTI Connext](https://community.rti.com/kb/what-maximum-number-Participants-domain) it is limited to 120 Participants per Domain.

## Proposed approach

The goal of this proposal is to improve overall performance by avoiding the creation of one Participant per Node.
API changes will be avoided, if possible.

### Mapping of DDS Participant to a ROS entity

There are two alternatives, besides the one-to-one Node to Participant mapping used pre-Foxy:
- Using one Participant per process.
- Using one Participant per Context.

> The second approach allows more flexibility, and it will allow creating more than one Participant for applications that need it e.g. domain bridge applications.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
The second approach is much more flexible, allowing more than one Participant in a single application for those that need it e.g. domain bridge applications.
```

Thus, a one-to-one Participant to Context mapping was chosen.

> When the case where multiple Nodes are running in a single process, there are different options for grouping them by - ranging from a separate context for each Node, over grouping a few Nodes in the same context, to using a single context for all Nodes.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: 
```suggestion
When multiple Nodes are running in a single process, there are different options for grouping them by - ranging from a separate context for each Node, over grouping a few Nodes in the same context, to using a single context for all Nodes.
```

For most applications, only one Context is created.

### Discovery information

If a one-to-one Node to Participant mapping is not used, extra discovery information is needed to be able to match other entities to a Node e.g. Publishers, Subscriptions, etc.
Several approaches can be used to share this information.
The proposed approach uses a topic for it.
Each Participant publishes a message with all the information needed to match an entity to a Node.
The message structure is the following:

* ParticipantInfo
  * gid
  * NodeInfo
    * Node namespace
    * Node name
    * Reader gid
    * writed gid

When one entity is updated (e.g.: a Publisher is created or destroyed), a new message is sent.

Identification of Clients and Servers happens according to the ROS conventions for their topic names (see [	
Topic and Service name mapping to DDS](140_topic_and_service_name_mapping.md)).

This topic is considered an implementation detail, and not all `rmw` implementations have to use it.
Thus, all the necessary logic has to be in the rmw implementation itself or in an upstream package.
Implementing this logic in `rcl` would make it part of the API, and not an implementation detail.

> To avoid code repetition, a common implementation of the logic was done in [rmw_dds_common](https://github.com/ros2/rmw_dds_common/).

Reviewer: @ivanpauno 
```suggestion
To avoid code repetition, a common implementation of this logic is provided by the [rmw_dds_common](https://github.com/ros2/rmw_dds_common/) package.
```

That option avoids receiving messages from Publishers within the same Node.
This wasn't implemented in all the rmw implementations (e.g.: [FastRTPS](https://github.com/ros2/rmw_fastrtps/blob/099f9eed9a0f581447405fbd877c6d3b15f1f26e/rmw_fastrtps_cpp/src/rmw_Subscription.cpp#L118)).

After this change, implementing this feature will be less direct.
Some extra logic needs to be added in order to identify from which Node a Publisher was created.

## Alternative implementations

### Using keyed topics

Keyed topics could be used, with the Participant gid as the key.
That would allow the Reader side of the topic to use a keep last, depth 1 history.

### Using Participant/Writer/Reader userData QoS

Instead of using a custom topic to share the extra ROS specific discovery information, a combination of Participant/Reader/Writer `userData` could be used:

- Participant `userData`: list of Nodes created by the Participant (updated when Node created destroyed).
- Reader user `userData`: Node name/namespace.
- Writer user `userData`: Node name/namespace.

> That information would be enough to satisfy ROS 2 required graph API.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno nit: I see we talk about ROS 2 and about ROS interchangeably. Let's stick to either, but not both.

---
layout: default
title: Node to Participant mapping
permalink: articles/node_to_participant_mapping.html

> abstract: This article analyzes the performance implications of enforcings a one-to-one mapping between ROS nodes and DDS participants, and propose alternative approaches.

Reviewer 3: Can you clarify something for me? Are we only talking about composition? Or are we talking about trying to use the same participant regardless of how the node is written?

Author: The idea is that if you create a bunch of nodes or compose some nodes in the same process (by using manual composition or dynamically loading them in the same container), they should use the same participant by default.
A mechanism for using different participants in the same process should be available too (if we use one participant per context, creating a new context will be the way).

author: '[Ivan Paunovic](https://github.com/ivanpauno)'
published: true
categories: Middleware
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

Original Author: {{ page.author }}

## Introduction

### What is a `Node`?

In ROS, a `Node` is an entity used to group other entities.
For example: `Publishers`, `Subscriptions`, `Services`, `Clients`.
`Nodes` ease organization and code reuse, as they can be composed and launched in different ways.

### What is a `Domain Participant`?

A `Domain Participant` is a type of DDS entity.
`Participants` also group other entities, like `Publishers`, `Subscribers`, `Data Writters`, `Data Readers`, etc.
But participants do more than that:

- Each `Participant` does discovery by its own.
  Creating more than one `Participant` increases cpu usage and network IO load.
- Each `Participant` keeps track of other `Domain Participants` and DDS entities.
  Using more than one will duplicate that data.

> - Each `Participant` may create multiple threads for event handling, discovery, etc.

Reviewer 4: Just FYI, https://github.com/ros2/rmw/issues/180#issuecomment-520681302 (confirmed pstree and strace)

Author: I arrived to the same conclusion for `FastRTPS`, number of threads = main thread + 2 + 4 * participant. For 20 nodes (and the current one to one mapping between nodes and participant), 83 threads are created.

  The number of threads created per participant depend on the DDS vendor (e.g.: [connext](https://community.rti.com/best-practices/create-few-domainparticipants-possible)).

For those reasons, `Participants` are heavyweight.

### Current status

There is a one-to-one mapping between `Nodes` and `DDS Participants`.
This simplified the design, as `DDS Participants` provide the same organization that a `Node` needs.

> The drawback of this approach, is that performance is deteriorated.

Reviewer 5: Instead of:

> is that performance is deteriorated

I would suggest:

> is that with an increasing number of nodes the overhead also increases.

Furthermore, the maximum number of `Domain participants` is rather small.
For example, [RTI connext](https://community.rti.com/kb/what-maximum-number-participants-domain) is limited to 120 participants per domain.

## Proposal

The goal of this proposal is to improve overall performance by avoiding the creation of one `Domain Participant` per `Node`.
API changes will be avoided, if possible.

### What is a participant mapped to?

There are two main alternatives:
- One participant per process.
- One participant per context.

The second approach allows more flexibility.

> Considering that by default there's only one context per process, it won't lower the performance.

Reviewer 5: Instead of:

> it won't lower the performance.

I would suggest:

> it wouldn't affect the case where each node runs in its own process.

And maybe add:

> And even in the case that multiple nodes are running in a single process it allows to group them into different context - ranging from a separate context for each node, over grouping a few nodes in the same context, to using a single context for all nodes.

> Moreover, a mechanism for re-using the same participant in two separete contexts could be added.

Reviewer 5: I would remove this sentence since while technically maybe possible I don't think this is something we would want to implement / offer.

### What is a Node now?

There's no lightweight DDS equivalent of a ROS `Node`, so these must be implemented on top of it.
A `Node` should be able to:
- Create other entities as `Publishers`, `Subscriptions`, `Services` and `Clients`.
  `Nodes` should own those entities, that is to say, those entity shouldn't outlive a `Node`.
- List all its entities.

For all the entities, it should be possible to get the `Node` that created them.
Each `Participant` should store all the information needed about its nodes, and communicate it other `Participants`.

### How `Node` information is communicated?

#### Using a topic

The name of all the available `Nodes`, and its `Publishers`, `Subscriptions`, `Services`, `Clients` should be available for every `Participant`.
This information can be communicated using a `topic`.
That topic will be an implementation detail and hidden to the user (i.e.: the `rt/` prefix won't be added to this `DDS topic`).

A message could be sent for:
- Each `Node`
- Each `Participant`

> The second option reduces the amount of messages.

Reviewer 3: Is it possible for a node to be dynamically launched using an already-established participant, though?

Author: Yes. The only problem with dynamically adding a node is how to extend access control policies.
Besides that, it isn't problematic.

Reviewer 3: Right, there doesn't seem to be a good solution for that in DDS-Security, but my question here doesn't relate to security. If a message is only sent for every new participant (i.e. "the second option"), how can new nodes be launched using a participant that already exists? Are new messages sent?

Author: Ok, maybe the description of the article is not clear.
Each participant send a message with the "full state" of all its nodes. But the message is not only send when a new participant is created, it's send when a new node is created.
As history depth is 1, late subscribers will only receive the last message of each participant.

Author: The difference is that in one case you have one individual message for each node, and in the other you have one individual message for each participant.
In both cases, an update is needed  when a new node, publisher, subscriber, service or client is created.

Reviewer 6: Yeah I think this could be more detailed and that would make it clearer. It wasn't even clear to me that it was an either or option, like I first imagined it would publish a message for both cases (maybe on different topics). More detail would help.

It also allow organizing the data using the `Participant` GUID as the key.
It's not possible to organize the data using the `Node` name as a key, because it can collide.
`Node` name uniqueness can be enforced using a collision resolution mechanism, but it can be detected beforehand (i.e.: this information will be needed by the resolution mechanism).
In the following, the second option will be considered.

##### State Message

Each `Participant` will send a message representing their state.
A keyed topic could be used for communicating it.
The `Participant` GUID can be used as the key.

> This helps for keeping only one message per `Participant` in the history (see `QoS for communicating node information`).

Reviewer 7: >(see `QoS for communicating node information`)

link please ?

edit: I asked too quickly, but still ^^

- History: Keep Last
- History depth: 1
- Reliability: Reliable

In the second case, durability can be changed to `Volatile`.

#### Using USER_DATA and GROUP_DATA QoSPolicy

Each `Participant` could have in its user data the list of node names that owns.
When this data is changed, each `ParticipantListener` will be notified.
This is not a good option, as `UserData` is just a sequence of bytes.
Organizing a complex message in it won't be easy nor performant.

Similarly to `UserData`, `GroupData` is a available in `Publishers` and `Subscribers`.
These entities only need to communicate the GUID of the `Participant` and the `Node` name from which it was created.
This idea can be combined with a topic just publishing the list of `Node` names, without including all the other vectors in the message.
Although, it is more difficult to communicate this information for `Services` and `Clients`, as they use behind the scenes just a `DDS Publisher` and `Subscriber`.

### Other implications

#### Security

In `DDS`, security can be specified at a `Participant` level.
If one `Node` is mapped to one `Participant`, individual configuration of its security key and access control policy is possible.

> From a security point of view, only being able to configure it at a `Participant` (or per process) level is enough.

Reviewer 3: Can you expand upon this? I feel like I'm missing context-- what is your definition of "enough"?

Author: I think that composing nodes that are not trusted in the same process is not secure, regardless of control access policies, because they share the same address space.
If you want to run a  `Node` you don't trust, you should run it in another process.
In that case, configuring different access control policies will be possible.

Reviewer 6: I think I agree, that it is sufficient to be limited to one configuration per context as opposed to the more granular one configuration per node, because if nodes need to be configured separately then they can be put into separate (named) contexts or better yet in separate processes (since nodes of different security configurations in the same process present other security concerns).

However, it would be good to clearer as to why this ok and also to get some more people from the security WG to comment on it.

There's not much sense on having different access control policies for `Nodes` in the same process.
As they share the same address space, other vulnerabilities are possible.

##### How to create a new security key?

Before, we were creating a key for each `Node`.
The full name of the node was used for creating it.

If we create one `Participant` per context, we will only need a key for each of them, and not one per `Node`.
There are two alternatives:

- Add the concept of `Context` name (or `Participant` name).
  In this way, the key of each participant could be specified independently.
- Use one key per process.

>   All the `Participants` within one process will use the same key.

Author: Is this possible?

Reviewer 3: Technically yes, but it abstracts the concept of the node away from DDS. Nodes no longer have an established DDS identity-- they share the identity of the participant, which means they also must share a policy, which I'll expand upon [below](https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/250#discussion_r313077039).

Reviewer 6: Actually I don't think it works because you may always have more that one participant per process, so it would only make sense to use one key per process if you also restricted it to one context/participant per process.

##### How to specify access policies?

Access control policies could still be specified per `Node` basis.

> When a `Participant` is created, it should look at the access control policies of each of its `Nodes` and compose them in a single configuration.

Author: Is it possible to add more access control policies after creating the `Participant` (e.g.: When later creating a `Node`)?
@mikaelarguedas @ruffsl Can you review the `Security` subsection of this article?
I don't know much about `sros2` and `DDS Security`.

Reviewer 3: This makes me nervous. I have a few thoughts:

- It greatly diminishes the usefulness of policies, and makes the attack surface very large. For example, any node launched in the same context as your motor controller can directly control the motors, even if it had a policy that didn't include such access.
- Making the policy of the participant dynamic like this will make security more difficult for end users than it already is, and we're trying to _gain_ adoption!
- Consider nodes `A` and `B`. Node `A` has a policy that allows it to publish to topic `/a`. Node `B` has a policy that explicitly disallows access to topic `/a`. What should the combined policy contain? (I'd say refuse to combine them). What is the difference between a policy that explicitly disallows access to topic `/a`, and a policy that has a default DENY and only access to topic `/b`? (note that policies are indeed DENY by default).

Reviewer 3: > Is it possible to add more access control policies after creating the Participant [...]?

I actually don't think you can do this. @mikaelarguedas can you confirm?

Author: > This makes me nervous. I have a few thoughts:
> 
> * It greatly diminishes the usefulness of policies, and makes the attack surface very large. For example, any node launched in the same context as your motor controller can directly control the motors, even if it had a policy that didn't include such access.

IMO, if you don't trust in a `Node` you have to run it in another process (running something you don't trust in the same address space is insecure).
In that case, you can configure its access control policies separately.

> * Making the policy of the participant dynamic like this will make security more difficult for end users than it already is, and we're trying to _gain_ adoption!

Maybe, a better idea is to specify a policy file when running the process.
Something like `path/to/executable --ros-args __security_dir=path/to/security/dir`.
We wouldn't have `Node` level access control policies, just per process level.
In the case someone create two `contexts` in the same process, I would use the same access control policies (I don't have an use case for two contexts, so I don't have a better idea).

> * Consider nodes `A` and `B`. Node `A` has a policy that allows it to publish to topic `/a`. Node `B` has a policy that explicitly disallows access to topic `/a`. What should the combined policy contain? (I'd say refuse to combine them).

I agree.

> What is the difference between a policy that explicitly disallows access to topic `/a`, and a policy that has a default DENY and only access to topic `/b`?

If we specify access control policies per Node and combine them, I would accept access to `/a` if one file accepts it and the other defaults to deny.
But I don't like much the idea. I think specifying a file per process will be clearer to the user.

Reviewer 8: Haven't read the spec for a while but my feeling is that permissions are passed at participant creation and not meant to be extended afterwards.
There is a notion of AccessControlListener allowing to listen to revokation of permissions during runtime, but I'm not sure this can / should be abused to extend permissions at runtime.

I don't fully agree with the idea that because there are other attack vectors in the case of running in the same process, per node access control becomes useless. Even if it's just for hygiene of development, making sure that all nodes have the exact permissions they need and no more is important. This avoids surprises down the road.

The notion of "trusting a node'  is unclear, being able to enforce a single node's interface and behavior is still very valuable. Maybe the way to cope with this is by documentation, e.g. discouraging users from using nodes in the same process until final deployment phase.

My take on merging policies:
- Explicit policies should take precedence over generic ones
- Conflicting explicit policies should result in an error
As the expected way to define policies in ROS 2s is currently a whitelist approach, conflicting policies should not happen, except if some nodes use a blacklist approach.

Reviewer 7: > my feeling is that permissions are passed at participant creation and not meant to be extended afterwards.

Any idea how are handled things like e.g. plugins ? Assuming it requires some access that is not covered by those of the node.

Author: > Haven't read the spec for a while but my feeling is that permissions are passed at participant creation and not meant to be extended afterwards.
> There is a notion of AccessControlListener allowing to listen to revokation of permissions during runtime, but I'm not sure this can / should be abused to extend permissions at runtime.

Considering this and your comment about how policies should be merged, I prefer having a way of passing the access control policies to each participant (or to each executable), than merging rules specified for each `Node`.
The second option can confuse the user, and make them believe that we have access control for each node.

> I don't fully agree with the idea that because there are other attack vectors in the case of running in the same process, per node access control becomes useless. Even if it's just for hygiene of development, making sure that all nodes have the exact permissions they need and no more is important. This avoids surprises down the road.

I agree that having access control policies per Node is nice, but I think that without them we can still have secure ROS 2.
IMO, the only option for having per Node access control policies, without having a one-to-one mapping between nodes and participants, is to build an access control layer on top of DDS security, just for nodes.
I think we can do that, but I wouldn't do that in a first iteration, the amount of work for just switching from a one-to-one mapping to only one participant per context is already big.

> Any idea how are handled things like e.g. plugins ? Assuming it requires some access that is not covered by those of the node.

I think there are two options about this:
- If plugins that may be loaded are already known, so the executable is run passing sufficiently permissive access control policies.
- We add a way of dynamically loading the plugin using another participant (if we decide to have one participant per context, in another context).

Reviewer 7: > * Plugins that may be loaded are already known, so the executable is run passing sufficiently permissive access control policies.

Well that is not always true. Anyone may develop a new plugin that the original author of the package has no idea about... Moreover appending possible plugin's access rules would be against the principle of least privilege encouraged in sros2.

Author: > Well that is not always true. Anyone may develop a new plugin that the original author of the package has no idea about... Moreover appending possible plugin's access rules would be against the principle of least privilege encouraged in sros2.

I wanted to say: `If plugins ...`, I've edited the original message.
I understand that that isn't always true. For the exceptions, the only solution I have in mind is the second item above (having a way of dynamically creating a new participant with different access control policies).

----

Also, I still think that though the original author doesn't know about the possible plugins that can be added, but who's running the executable may know what plugins will be used (with the exception of cases when you want to dynamically add a plugin that wasn't originally planed).
The access control policies should be written by who's running the executable, and not by the original author, if the approach we take is having access control policies per process (or per participant), and we stop supporting rules for each node.

Reviewer 7: Sorry I was one step ahead in my previous comment, considering how to 'distribute' access policies alongside packages. That's one of the current topic in the security WG.

Reviewer 6: > my feeling is that permissions are passed at participant creation and not meant to be extended afterwards.

+1

Any combining of node specific policies should, in my opinion, happen before the process launches, and then what is passed to the process already contains policies for all participants and nodes and pub/sub (etc...) that will ever be created in that process, even if they are loaded as plugins.

> Anyone may develop a new plugin that the original author of the package has no idea about...

I think that in that case the plugin developer needs to distribute a policy for their plugin (maybe as a node or just a group or pub/sub's) and then you combine that with the application that's loading the plugin's policy before running the program.

For example, if rviz had a security policy and you wanted to load a new plugin, then you'd need to get the security policy for that plugin, merge it with the rviz security policy (resolving any conflicts and warning about conflicting rules) and then run rviz with that new combined policy and then (and only then) you may load the new plugin.

At least that's the idea that I had coming out of our meeting with people about this proposal and security.

- There is a collision with the `Node` name created from another `Context`.
  By the nature of discovery, when a collision is detected, it's not possible to know what `Node` was created first without extra information.
  A collision resolution mechanism have to be decided for solving which `Node` continues living.
  A `timestamp` of the `Node` creation published in the state message can help to solve the problem.

If we don't change the `Node` to `Participant` mapping, the last item still stands and should be solved in a similar fashion.

#### Ignore local publications option

There's an `ignore_local_publications` option that can be set when [creating a subscription](https://github.com/ros2/rmw/blob/2250b3eee645d90f9e9d6c96d71ce3aada9944f3/rmw/include/rmw/rmw.h#L517).
That option avoids receiving messages from `Publishers` within the same `Node`.
This wasn't implemented in all the rmw implementations (e.g.: [FastRTPS](https://github.com/ros2/rmw_fastrtps/blob/099f9eed9a0f581447405fbd877c6d3b15f1f26e/rmw_fastrtps_cpp/src/rmw_subscription.cpp#L118)).

For emulating this behavior, messages could be ignored by checking from what `Node` the `Publisher` was created.

> This should be possible by querying the state messages, or the local chache were they are organized.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This should be possible by querying the state messages, or the local cache were they are organized.
```

#### Intra process communication

Currently, intra-process communication can be enable disabled in each `Publisher` and `Subscription`.
There is only one reason for that: intraprocess communication doesn't support all QoS policies.

Inter process messages from `Publishers` that can also communicate with a `Subscription` using the intra process layer are ignored before handling the callback.
The same problem will happen when having only one `Participant` per context, and it can be solved in the same fashion.

If in the future our intra process communication support all the QoS policies, we could forbid the possibility of enabling and dissabling it at `Node`, `Publisher`, `Subscription` level.
Configuring intra process communication with `Context` granularity should be enough.

#### Launching rclpy nodes

> In `Dashing` and before, a container for dinamically composing `rclpy Nodes` is not available.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In `Dashing` and before, a container for dynamically composing `rclpy Nodes` is not available.
```

---
layout: default
title: Node to Participant mapping
permalink: articles/node_to_participant_mapping.html
abstract: This article analyzes the performance implications of enforcings a one-to-one mapping between ROS nodes and DDS participants, and propose alternative approaches.
author: '[Ivan Paunovic](https://github.com/ivanpauno)'
published: true
categories: Middleware
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

Original Author: {{ page.author }}

## Introduction

### What is a `Node`?

> In ROS, a `Node` is an entity used to group other entities.

Author: I don't know if `entities` is the best word for this. I used the same word used in DDS.

Reviewer 6: I think "entity" is the right noun. Just always use "ROS entity" and "DDS entity" to avoid confusion, even if would be clear from the context.

- Each `Participant` keeps track of other `Domain Participants` and DDS entities.
  Using more than one will duplicate that data.
- Each `Participant` may create multiple threads for event handling, discovery, etc.
  The number of threads created per participant depend on the DDS vendor (e.g.: [connext](https://community.rti.com/best-practices/create-few-domainparticipants-possible)).

For those reasons, `Participants` are heavyweight.

### Current status

There is a one-to-one mapping between `Nodes` and `DDS Participants`.
This simplified the design, as `DDS Participants` provide the same organization that a `Node` needs.
The drawback of this approach, is that performance is deteriorated.
Furthermore, the maximum number of `Domain participants` is rather small.
For example, [RTI connext](https://community.rti.com/kb/what-maximum-number-participants-domain) is limited to 120 participants per domain.

## Proposal

The goal of this proposal is to improve overall performance by avoiding the creation of one `Domain Participant` per `Node`.
API changes will be avoided, if possible.

### What is a participant mapped to?

There are two main alternatives:
- One participant per process.

> - One participant per context.

Author: I didn't add a definition of `context`, because I don't have a good one.
I will describe it as: `the place where we put things that can be global`.

I also don't know about a case where is useful to have more than one context.

Reviewer 3: Haha, I was just about to ask that question. I know I've created new ones in the python API for tests, but it feels more like an implementation detail in my head at the moment. We should flesh that out a bit more if we're going to build on it.

Reviewer 6: I would describe it as:

> ... the non-global state of an init/shutdown cycle.

(https://github.com/ros2/rcl/blob/d655147310e3e63aff1555ad40fca1bb9cb7783e/rcl/include/rcl/context.h#L43)

But I'd also add, it can be the shared state between nodes, for example this is where the resources for intra-process communication live in rclcpp:

> Context which encapsulates shared state between nodes and other similar entities.

(https://github.com/ros2/rclcpp/blob/9b4f04927759b1e33f6b2d365fbed5cedb4e883b/rclcpp/include/rclcpp/context.hpp#L47)

Reviewer 6: > I also don't know about a case where is useful to have more than one context.

If you want two nodes to behave as if they were in separate process, e.g. no intra-process communication. You may want to do this for tests or some other scenario where it is important the nodes do not share resources. Probably more than anything, it's just because it doesn't have to be global or singleton so it is not.

Also, in the future, more resources may be shared there, for instance the participant, or perhaps something like a shared tf buffer?

There's not much sense on having different access control policies for `Nodes` in the same process.
As they share the same address space, other vulnerabilities are possible.

##### How to create a new security key?

Before, we were creating a key for each `Node`.
The full name of the node was used for creating it.

If we create one `Participant` per context, we will only need a key for each of them, and not one per `Node`.
There are two alternatives:

- Add the concept of `Context` name (or `Participant` name).
  In this way, the key of each participant could be specified independently.
- Use one key per process.
  All the `Participants` within one process will use the same key (is that possible?).

##### How to specify access policies?

Access control policies could still be specified per `Node` basis.
When a `Participant` is created, it should look at the access control policies of each of its `Nodes` and compose them in a single configuration.

QQ:
- Is it possible to add more access control policies after creating the `Participant` (e.g.: When later creating a `Node`).

> #### Node Name Uniqueness

Author: We can skip node name uniqueness in a first iteration.
I just left this section to clarify how the problem could be solved.

---
layout: default
title: Node to Participant mapping
permalink: articles/node_to_participant_mapping.html
abstract: This article analyzes the performance implications of enforcings a one-to-one mapping between ROS nodes and DDS participants, and propose alternative approaches.
author: '[Ivan Paunovic](https://github.com/ivanpauno)'
published: true
categories: Middleware
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

Original Author: {{ page.author }}

## Introduction

### What is a `Node`?

In ROS, a `Node` is an entity used to group other entities.
For example: `Publishers`, `Subscriptions`, `Services`, `Clients`.

> `Nodes` ease organization and code reuse, as they can be composed and launched in different ways.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`Nodes` ease organization and code reuse, as they can be composed in different ways.
```

### What is a `Domain Participant`?

A `Domain Participant` is a type of DDS entity.
`Participants` also group other entities, like `Publishers`, `Subscribers`, `Data Writters`, `Data Readers`, etc.
But participants do more than that:

> - Each `Participant` does discovery by its own.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Each `Participant` does discovery by its self.
```

Reviewer 6: Or actually:

```suggestion
- Each `Participant` participates in discovery.
```

  Creating more than one `Participant` increases cpu usage and network IO load.
- Each `Participant` keeps track of other `Domain Participants` and DDS entities.

>   Using more than one will duplicate that data.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  Using more than one will duplicate that data, within a single process.
```

For those reasons, `Participants` are heavyweight.

### Current status

There is a one-to-one mapping between `Nodes` and `DDS Participants`.
This simplified the design, as `DDS Participants` provide the same organization that a `Node` needs.
The drawback of this approach, is that with an increasing number of nodes the overhead also increases.
Furthermore, the maximum number of `Domain participants` is rather small.
For example, [RTI connext](https://community.rti.com/kb/what-maximum-number-participants-domain) is limited to 120 participants per domain.

## Proposal

The goal of this proposal is to improve overall performance by avoiding the creation of one `Domain Participant` per `Node`.
API changes will be avoided, if possible.

### What is a participant mapped to?

There are two main alternatives:
- One participant per process.
- One participant per context.

The second approach allows more flexibility.
Considering that by default there's only one context per process, it wouldn't affect the case where each node runs in its own process.

> And even in the case that multiple nodes are running in a single process it allows to group them into different context - ranging from a separate context for each node, over grouping a few nodes in the same context, to using a single context for all nodes.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
In the case where multiple nodes are running in a single process, we have different options for grouping them by context - ranging from a separate context for each node, over grouping a few nodes in the same context, to using a single context for all nodes.
```

> ### What is a Node now?

Reviewer 9: With the exception of the last sentence, I feel like this section is just a more verbose version of the introduction section about nodes. I think it may make sense to merge this with the introduction. The last sentence can be appended to the previous section as part of the consequences for choosing one participant per context, e.g.

> A consequence of removing the 1-to-1 mapping between nodes and participants is each `Participant` should store all the information needed about its nodes, and communicate it to other `Participants`.

There's no lightweight DDS equivalent of a ROS `Node`, so these must be implemented on top of it.
A `Node` should be able to:

> - Create other entities as `Publishers`, `Subscriptions`, `Services` and `Clients`.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- Create other entities such as `Publishers`, `Subscriptions`, `Services` and `Clients`.
```

  `Nodes` should own those entities, that is to say, those entity shouldn't outlive a `Node`.
- List all its entities.

For all the entities, it should be possible to get the `Node` that created them.
Each `Participant` should store all the information needed about its nodes, and communicate it other `Participants`.

### How `Node` information is communicated?

#### Using a topic

The name of all the available `Nodes`, and its `Publishers`, `Subscriptions`, `Services`, `Clients` should be available for every `Participant`.
This information can be communicated using a `topic`.
That topic will be an implementation detail and hidden to the user (i.e.: the `rt/` prefix won't be added to this `DDS topic`).

A message could be sent for:
- Each `Node`
- Each `Participant`

The second option reduces the amount of messages.
It also allow organizing the data using the `Participant` GUID as the key.
It's not possible to organize the data using the `Node` name as a key, because it can collide.

> `Node` name uniqueness can be enforced using a collision resolution mechanism, but it can be detected beforehand (i.e.: this information will be needed by the resolution mechanism).

Reviewer 9: can't?
```suggestion
`Node` name uniqueness can be enforced using a collision resolution mechanism, but it can't be detected beforehand (i.e.: this information will be needed by the resolution mechanism).
```

In the following, the second option will be considered.

##### State Message

Each `Participant` will send a message representing their state.
A keyed topic could be used for communicating it.
The `Participant` GUID can be used as the key.
This helps for keeping only one message per `Participant` in the history (see [QoS for communicating node information](#QoS-for-communicating-node-information)).

> The rest of the message will be a sequence of with the information of each node.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The rest of the message will be a sequence with information for each node.
```

> That message should contain the `Node` name, and four sequences:

Reviewer 9: It's not clear to me if this is a message per Node, or a message with a list of nodes (I think it's the latter):
```suggestion
For each `Node`, the message should contain the `Node` name, and four sequences:
```

Each published message should be available to late `Subscribers`, and only the last message of each key should be kept.
For that reason, the QoS of the `Publishers` should be:

- Durability: Transient Local
- History: Keep Last
- History depth: 1
- Reliability: Reliable

Considering that a keyed topic will be used, in which the history depth apply for each key, only one `Publisher` per process will be needed.
In that case, `unregister_instance` can be used for delete that key from the history (see [RTI Managing Data Instances](https://community.rti.com/static/documentation/connext-dds/5.2.3/doc/manuals/connext_dds/html_files/RTI_ConnextDDS_CoreLibraries_UsersManual/Content/UsersManual/Managing_Data_Instances__Working_with_Ke.htm)).

The QoS of the `Subscriber` should be:

- Durability: Transient Local
- History: Keep Last
- History depth: 1
- Reliability: Reliable

The subscriber could access data in two different ways:
- Polled and accessed using `Subscriber` read method when needed.
- Listened, accessed using subscriber take method and organized in a local cache.

The second option allows better organization of this information (e.g.: in hash tables).

> #### Using USER_DATA and GROUP_DATA QoSPolicy

Reviewer 6: I think it would be good to collect these in an alternatives section at the end. I think it's cleaner to state what the proposal is, perhaps mentioning that alternatives were considered and they are described in the appendix, and then you can expand on the alternatives and why they were not taken there.

> Each `Participant` could have in its user data the list of node names that owns.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Each `Participant` could store in its user data, the list of node names that it owns.
```

When this data is changed, each `ParticipantListener` will be notified.
This is not a good option, as `UserData` is just a sequence of bytes.
Organizing a complex message in it won't be easy nor performant.

Similarly to `UserData`, `GroupData` is a available in `Publishers` and `Subscribers`.
These entities only need to communicate the GUID of the `Participant` and the `Node` name from which it was created.
This idea can be combined with a topic just publishing the list of `Node` names, without including all the other vectors in the message.
Although, it is more difficult to communicate this information for `Services` and `Clients`, as they use behind the scenes just a `DDS Publisher` and `Subscriber`.

> ### Which layer will be implemented in?

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
### Implementation
```

The implementation can be done in two different ways:

> - Through rmw implementations to rcl.

Reviewer 6: What is this option exactly?

- Modify rmw implementations without modifying rmw API (as long as possible).

The first approach have the following disadvantages:
- There is no `Node` concept in `rmw` layer, as `Node` discovery is solved in `rcl`.

>   Actually, all the `Node` related API in `rmw` doesn't have more sense.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  Actually, all the `Node` related APIs in `rmw` would no longer make sense.
```

- Currently, no threads are created in the `rcl` layer.
  It will be needed in case `Node` discovery is done in this layer.

> - It will force to build the concept of `Node` on top of the underlying middleware in use, regardless if the middleware already has a lightweight entity similar to a `Node`.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- It will force us to build the concept of `Node` on top of the underlying middleware, regardless if the middleware already has a lightweight entity similar to a `Node`.
```

- It will break API in many layers.

The second approach has the following disadvantages:

> - Each `rmw` have to reimplement node discovery logic.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- Each RMW implementation has to reimplement node discovery logic.
```

>   - It can be worked arround creating a new common package that uses the abstractions in `rmw`.

Reviewer 9: This doesn't sound like a second disadvantage, but a continuation of the first.
```suggestion
  This can be avoided by creating a common package that uses the abstractions in `rmw`.
```

    Each of the implementations that wants to use this should depend on this common package.

The second approach is preferred, as it is more flexible and it avoids breaking API in many layers.

### Other implications

#### Security

In `DDS`, security can be specified at a `Participant` level.
If one `Node` is mapped to one `Participant`, individual configuration of its security key and access control policy is possible.
From a security point of view, only being able to configure it at a `Participant` (or per process) level is enough.

> There's not much sense on having different access control policies for `Nodes` in the same process.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
It does not make much sense to have different access control policies for `Nodes` in the same process.
```

- There is a collision with the `Node` name created from another `Context`.
  By the nature of discovery, when a collision is detected, it's not possible to know what `Node` was created first without extra information.
  A collision resolution mechanism have to be decided for solving which `Node` continues living.
  A `timestamp` of the `Node` creation published in the state message can help to solve the problem.

If we don't change the `Node` to `Participant` mapping, the last item still stands and should be solved in a similar fashion.

#### Ignore local publications option

There's an `ignore_local_publications` option that can be set when [creating a subscription](https://github.com/ros2/rmw/blob/2250b3eee645d90f9e9d6c96d71ce3aada9944f3/rmw/include/rmw/rmw.h#L517).
That option avoids receiving messages from `Publishers` within the same `Node`.
This wasn't implemented in all the rmw implementations (e.g.: [FastRTPS](https://github.com/ros2/rmw_fastrtps/blob/099f9eed9a0f581447405fbd877c6d3b15f1f26e/rmw_fastrtps_cpp/src/rmw_subscription.cpp#L118)).

For emulating this behavior, messages could be ignored by checking from what `Node` the `Publisher` was created.

> This should be possible by querying the state messages, or the local cache were they are organized.

Reviewer 6: I don't follow how this would work, can you expand on it?

#### Intra process communication

Currently, intra-process communication can be enable disabled in each `Publisher` and `Subscription`.

> There is only one reason for that: intraprocess communication doesn't support all QoS policies.

Reviewer 6: This is an important reason, but I don't know if it is the only reason... Perhaps just say "an important reason for being able to selectively enable intra-process is..."

Inter process messages from `Publishers` that can also communicate with a `Subscription` using the intra process layer are ignored before handling the callback.
The same problem will happen when having only one `Participant` per context, and it can be solved in the same fashion.

If in the future our intra process communication support all the QoS policies, we could forbid the possibility of enabling and dissabling it at `Node`, `Publisher`, `Subscription` level.

> Configuring intra process communication with `Context` granularity should be enough.

Reviewer 6: Again, this seems like a pretty big assumption.

#### Launching rclpy nodes

In `Dashing` and before, a container for dynamically composing `rclpy Nodes` is not available.
If this is not added, launching multiple `rclpy Nodes` in a launch file will create multiple participants.
That will make the performance worse, compared with composing `rclcpp Nodes`.
A `rclpy` component container should be added to solve the problem.

> A generic container can also be considered, allowing to dynamically load `Nodes` from both clients.

Reviewer 6: Does this depend on how rclpy dynamic loading is accomplished? If it's with multiple interpreters I agree, but you could have a single interpreter and also use a context in rclpy (https://github.com/ros2/rclpy/blob/b5b4e36c362be044f146df434e73328340c8843f/rclpy/rclpy/context.py#L19).

Author: Yeah, but AFAIU we don't currently have a way to load a node in a running `Python` interpreter.

Each published message should be available to late `Subscribers`, and only the last message of each key should be kept.
For that reason, the QoS of the `Publishers` should be:

- Durability: Transient Local
- History: Keep Last
- History depth: 1
- Reliability: Reliable

If a keyed topic is used, in which the history depth apply for each key, only one `Publisher` per process will be needed.
The QoS of the `Subscriber` should be:

- Durability: Transient Local
- History: Keep Last
- History depth: 1
- Reliability: Reliable

In case keyed topics aren't used, `keep all` history should be used.

The subscriber could access data in two different ways:
- Polled and accessed using `Subscriber` read method when needed.
- Listened, accessed using subscriber take method and organized in a local cache.

The second option allows better organization of this information (e.g.: in hash tables).

#### Using USER_DATA and GROUP_DATA QoSPolicy

Each `Participant` could store in its user data, the list of node names that it owns.
When this data is changed, each `ParticipantListener` will be notified.
This is not a good option, as `UserData` is just a sequence of bytes.

> Organizing a complex message in it won't be easy nor performant.

Reviewer 10: Just curious, would it not be possible to reuse the proposed IDL for encoding the ROS discovery info to serialize it into the UserData paload of the discovery packet, so that users wouldn't have seperate discovery layers that act outside the middlewares own QoS/security settings?

Author: Yes, that's definitely an option.
The only problem, is that that will require the user data to be sent again when modified. Though that's supported in DDS, I don't see support of that in some implementations (particularly, I don't think `FastRTPS` support that).

There was another way of communicating this information, using `userData` from the `Participant`, `DataWriter` and `DataReader`, that didn't require them to change (the document mentions using Publisher/Subscriber groupData, but that can be replaced with DataWriter/DataReader userData). Again, the limitation in this case was the lack of support in `FastRTPS` for DataWriter/DataReader userData (or Publisher/Subscribe GroupData).

The solution that I like the most, is the one combining Participant/DataWriter/DataReader userData, because information doesn't need to be updated and is just provided once. In this case, we could also take advantage of using a ROS message and serializing it there.

Reviewer 10: > Again, the limitation in this case was the lack of support in FastRTPS for DataWriter/DataReader userData (or Publisher/Subscribe GroupData).

Is there an open issue on this we could track, or do we need to open a new one?

> The solution that I like the most, is the one combining Participant/DataWriter/DataReader userData, because information doesn't need to be updated and is just provided once.

Just to clarify, for every new DDS DataReader/DataWriter pair that a new node would add to a DDS participant, that pair could broadcast UserData that would include the ROS level discovery info for that respective node? If a node subscribes to the same topic as another node in the same context, is a new DataReader still added to the participant? Similarly for publishing ad DataWriters as well?

I guess if the two nodes have different QoS settings for the same topic, then such might need to be the case. But if the QoS setting are the same, would separate DataReader/DataWriters still be necessary for other reasons like ownership of messages in the message queue history for callbacks.

I'm just trying to figure out if the UserData from DDS DataWriter/DataReader would be unique to a node, or from a collection of nodes that share that DataWriter/DataReader instance by virtue of being in the same DDS participant or ROS context.

Author: > Is there an open issue on this we could track, or do we need to open a new one?

It's commented in the code that there's no support for DataWriter/DataReader userData/groupData. You can open a ticket to ask for it to be added.
In the case of `Participant` `userData` there's no API allowing to modify it after the Participant gets created. A ticket could be opened too.

> Just to clarify, for every new DDS DataReader/DataWriter pair that a new node would add to a DDS participant, that pair could broadcast UserData that would include the ROS level discovery info for that respective node?

Yes.

> If a node subscribes to the same topic as another node in the same context, is a new DataReader still added to the participant? Similarly for publishing ad DataWriters as well?

Yes.

> I'm just trying to figure out if the UserData from DDS DataWriter/DataReader would be unique to a node, or from a collection of nodes that share that DataWriter/DataReader instance by virtue of being in the same DDS participant or ROS context.

Currently, most implementations are creating a DDS Publisher/Subscriber for each ROS Publisher/Subscription. Some are just creating a DDS Publisher/Subscriber, and creating one DataWriter/DataReader per ROS Publisher/Subscription. The last solution is probably the ideal one.

----

I will correct I previous mistake I made.
The idea to combining Participant/Endpoint userData doesn't avoid it to be needed to be updated. Particularly, Participant userData would still be needed to be updated:
- Participant userData would be a list of node names/namespace + context name: Updated when a new node is created/destroyed.
- DataWriter/DataReader userData is the node name and namespace of the creator. There's no need to resend it.

The advantage of this combination is that less information has to be resent, and "messages" (userData content) is simpler.

Reviewer 8: > The idea to combining Participant/Endpoint userData doesn't avoid it to be needed to be updated. Particularly, Participant userData would still be needed to be updated:
>  -  Participant userData would be a list of node names/namespace + context name: Updated when a new node is created/destroyed.
>  -  DataWriter/DataReader userData is the node name and namespace of the creator. There's no need to resend it.

Can all of these out-of-band info be encrypted ? if not which ones can't be?
I'm trying to evaluate if we would end up leaking system information in a similar manner to https://github.com/ros2/sros2/issues/172 (and maybe leaking topic info as well)

Author: > Can all of these out-of-band info be encrypted ? if not which ones can't be?

I guess DDS build-in topics are all encrypted if you're using security (including userData info), I would be extremely surprised if not.

----

After reading ros2/sros2#172, it seems that that information is not being encrypted.
I'm not completely sure if that's a bug in `fastrtps` or the DDS security specification doesn't cover that. But this info could (and should) be encrypted.

Reviewer 11: > If a node subscribes to the same topic as another node in the same context, is a new DataReader still added to the participant? Similarly for publishing ad DataWriters as well?
>
> I guess if the two nodes have different QoS settings for the same topic, then such might need to be the case. > But if the QoS setting are the same, would separate DataReader/DataWriters still be necessary for other reasons like ownership of messages in the message queue history for callbacks.

The DDS interface pretty much requires a DataReader for each ROS2 subscription, regardless of QoS settings, because you take the data. And in the current ROS2 model, publishers can't share DataWriters because the publisher GID is accessible to the subscribers. (If it weren't, for obvious reasons it'd still only be the keep-all writers that one could combine.)

Naturally one could multiplex everything on a single reader/writer by re-implementing a ton of things and putting additional information in the generated IDL, &c. — but that would be a bit silly.

> I guess DDS build-in topics are all encrypted if you're using security (including userData info), I would be extremely surprised if not.
>
> After reading ros2/sros2#172, it seems that that information is not being encrypted.
> I'm not completely sure if that's a bug in fastrtps or the DDS security specification doesn't cover that. But this info could (and should) be encrypted.

From the way I read the specs, participant discovery data must always be sent in the clear because it is what bootstraps the protocol, and this unfortunately includes the “user data” QoS. Reader and writer discovery is encrypted (when required by the governance file) and that also protects the topic/group/user data fields. (Checked it with Cyclone DDS; @ruffsl, @vmayoral, re https://github.com/ros2/sros2/issues/172, I’d be interested in knowing via which path the type information was leaked, I can’t find any type name in a capture.)

> The idea to combining Participant/Endpoint userData doesn't avoid it to be needed to be updated. Particularly, Participant userData would still be needed to be updated:
> 
> * Participant userData would be a list of node names/namespace + context name: Updated when a new node is created/destroyed.
> * DataWriter/DataReader userData is the node name and namespace of the creator. There's no need to resend it.
>
> The advantage of this combination is that less information has to be resent, and "messages" (userData content) is simpler.
 
It seems to me there is an alternative to modifying the participant user data (although it is spec’d feature and pretty widely supported by DDS implementations): simply infer the nodes from the reader/writer info. There are a few downsides I can see to this, but all seem rather minor:

* Getting a list of nodes directly from DDS discovery info requires iterating over all readers & writers. Maintaining a better index is easy — and the PR on ``rmw_dds_common`` already implements that, right?
* A ROS2 node without readers or writers would not be visible in the network. It won’t participate either, so its being invisible doesn’t seem like a big deal.
* If a single process/context/DDS participant may have multiple instantiations of the same ROS2 node, merely putting the node names in the reader/writer info is not enough. That can solved by adding a unique node identifier.

You could put this info in the “user data” QoS of each reader/writer, or you could require that no DDS Publisher/Subscriber be used for more than one ROS2 node and put it in the “group data” QoS of the publisher/subscriber. Each reader/writer’d effectively end up distributing a copy of it anyway in the discovery, but I’d say it is slightly more elegant.

Author: > Naturally one could multiplex everything on a single reader/writer by re-implementing a ton of things and putting additional information in the generated IDL, &c. — but that would be a bit silly.

100% agreed.

> From the way I read the specs, participant discovery data must always be sent in the clear because it is what bootstraps the protocol, and this unfortunately includes the “user data” QoS

That's good to know.

> I’d be interested in knowing via which path the type information was leaked, I can’t find any type name in a capture.

It was leaked via Participant `userData`.

> Getting a list of nodes directly from DDS discovery info requires iterating over all readers & writers. Maintaining a better index is easy — and the PR on rmw_dds_common already implements that, right?

To clarify, the current PR uses a topic where this data is published.
This is discussing one of the alternatives.

To answer the question: No, the list of nodes would be available from the `userData` field of all `Participants` (which would be a list of node names and namespaces).

i.e.:
Participant user data is used to share a list of nodes, from where you can then print a node list.
Reader/Writer userData is used to specify which node created it.

> A ROS2 node without readers or writers would not be visible in the network. It won’t participate either, so its being invisible doesn’t seem like a big deal.

No, same as above.

> If a single process/context/DDS participant may have multiple instantiations of the same ROS2 node, merely putting the node names in the reader/writer info is not enough. That can solved by adding a unique node identifier.

Not exactly. If each context checks that there's not repeated node name (which can be easily done), then from both the `Participant` guid and node name you have an uniquely identified node (though adding a unique node identifier sounds pretty reasonable).

- Using one Participant per process.
- Using one Participant per Context.

> The second approach is much more flexibility, allowing more than one Participant in a single application for those that need it e.g. domain bridge applications.

Reviewer: @ivanpauno 
```suggestion
The second approach is much more flexible, allowing more than one Participant in a single application for those that need it e.g. domain bridge applications.
```
